1. Overall Conversation Summary
Project goal
Build ProVSA, a Python desktop stock scanner for swing trading based on strict Volume Spread Analysis (VSA) methodology.
The system is intended to evaluate real-market evidence, not merely detect textbook-perfect VSA patterns.
Core architecture evolved around:
market data/metrics
swing detection and classification
trend/context analysis
professional swing scoring
Smart Money scoring
structural filtering
scanner/report generation
Architecture & methodology decisions
Python was selected over C#.
pandas, NumPy, yfinance, and the existing metrics/VSA infrastructure are used.
Daily market data can be converted to weekly data for background analysis.
VSA evidence was expanded into categories including:
Supply
Demand
Effort
Result
Trend
Phase
Volume
Spread
Signal
Trend/swing models and enums were progressively formalized.
Swing detection uses reversal confirmation based on average spread and configured confirmation bars.
Swing classification uses HH, HL, LH, and LL.
Trend direction/state is derived from weighted recent swing structure.
A key design principle throughout has been preserving meaningful imperfect real-market VSA evidence rather than forcing textbook conformity.
Performance optimization phase

We moved from scalar-per-swing Smart Money scoring toward genuine batch/vectorized Smart Money scoring:

all swing metric arrays
        ↓
one vectorized/batched Smart Money calculation
        ↓
one SmartMoneyScore per swing
        ↓
StructureFilter reuses them
Batched Smart Money scoring was implemented and validated against scalar scoring.
Structural scoring was subsequently batched as well.
Lazy construction was introduced so detailed Smart Money/structural component objects are created only for relevant structural survivors.
History snapshot optimization
ProfessionalScorer.prepare_history_snapshots() became a major optimization target.
Initial reference implementation was expensive because every swing rebuilt historical windows.
V1 introduced rolling deques plus sorted windows using bisect_left/insort_left.
V1 became the accepted baseline after semantic equivalence testing.
Several later optimizations were experimentally attempted and rejected because they either:
regressed performance, or
broke incremental equivalence.
We therefore adopted a strict rule: every optimization must preserve the existing semantic tests before being kept.
2. Latest Conversation & Project Details
Latest optimization

The profiler identified these major hotspots in prepare_history_snapshots():

remove_before() — ~19.2%
volumes = tuple(...) — ~9.4%
spreads = tuple(...) — ~9.0%
SwingHistorySnapshot(...) — ~16.6%
spread-adjusted amplitude tuple construction — ~6.4%

We first optimized the remove_before() hotspot by:

removing the nested helper function;
inlining the five expiration loops directly into the main swing loop;
leaving the actual rolling-window data structures and semantics unchanged.

That optimization was committed as:

8e9d095e3646b0deb8c7232a814809d65da762de

The user benchmarked it:

swings:     5000
repeats:    20
lookback:   10
time:       34.620 ms
snapshots:  4,999

Then the user ran the semantic tests:

9 passed

So that optimization was accepted.

Profiler follow-up

The user supplied profiler commit:

fee55ebe03de5fe8f1181c047b10007573886ba5

We inspected the current professional_scorer.py and identified tuple materialization as the next target.

We then changed:

volumes = tuple(value for _, value in history_volumes)

to a supposedly cheaper equivalent construction.

That change was committed as:

d3302d3de68c3e8555a15665eb046e4bd2a27346

Result

The user benchmarked the new version:

swings:     5000
repeats:    20
lookback:   10
time:       47.295 ms
snapshots:  4,999

This is clearly worse than the previous accepted result of 34.620 ms.

Therefore the latest d3302d3 change should be reverted.

Important state distinction
8e9d095... = accepted optimization.
d3302d3... = rejected regression and should not remain in production.
The user initially explicitly requested that this latest change be reverted and committed, but then asked for this project alignment summary instead. The revert is therefore currently a pending action item.
3. Next Steps & Action Items
ME — User
After the latest regression is reverted, do not benchmark the rejected volumes optimization again.
Continue providing benchmark/profiler output after each accepted optimization.

For future history optimizations, continue validating with:

python -m pytest tests/test_history_snapshot_optimization.py tests/test_incremental_equivalence.py -q

Use:

python benchmark_history_snapshots.py

for performance comparison.

Use:

python profile_history_snapshots.py

when we need to identify the next hotspot.

YOU — AI
Immediate: revert commit d3302d3de68c3e8555a15665eb046e4bd2a27346.
Commit the revert through GitHub.
Restore the previously accepted 8e9d095... implementation.
Do not alter the accepted remove_before() optimization.
After the revert, instruct the user to run the semantic tests and benchmark to confirm the baseline is restored.
Once confirmed, proceed to the next profiler hotspot, rather than optimizing blindly.
Candidate next targets:
spreads tuple materialization
SwingHistorySnapshot(...) construction
spread-adjusted amplitude tuple construction
Every candidate must be tested for semantic equivalence before acceptance.
Pending Questions
Has the d3302d3 regression been reverted? → Not yet.
What is the restored post-revert benchmark? → Pending.
Which remaining profiler hotspot gives the best safe optimization opportunity? → Determine from the restored profiler output after the revert.